DIRECTORATE OF CHILDREN’S SERVICES
The Children Act .2022 states that anyone who has reason to believe that a child needs care
and protection may report it to the closest authorized officer, including police officer,
Probation officers, administrative officer, or children’s officer.
CASE CATEGORIES: Reported and Disposed
Table 1: Case Categories: Reported
No
Case
Category Definition
Abandoned
1.
Refers to a child; (a) who has been deserted by the parent, guardian or caregiver;
or (b) whose parent, guardian or caregiver has willfully failed to make contact with
the child for a period of more than six months; (Children Act, 2022, Sec 2)
2. Abduction Refers to a child under the age of 14 that is unlawfully, forcibly, or fraudulently
taken, enticed or detained by someone other than his/her guardian. abduction
occurs in various forms (Penal Code Section 256)
3. Attempted
Defilement An attempt to commit an act which would cause penetration with a child (Section 9
of Sexual Offences Act 2006)
4. Custody Actual custody means the physical possession, care, and control over a child,
whether or not such custody is exercised independently or jointly with another
person; (The Children Act 2022, Sec 2)
Custody means lawful custody, whether by operation of law, written agreement, or
order of a Court of competent jurisdiction; “legal custody” means the conferment,
to a person, of parental rights and responsibilities of a person having lawful
custody over a child for a defined period of time under an order of a Court of
competent jurisdiction;(The Children Act 2022 Sec 2)
5. Physical
abuse/
violence
Refers to (a) the infliction of physical harm by any person on a child; (b) the
infliction or inducement of physical harm by any person on a child by acts
intended to cause harm or negligent acts or omissions that cause harm; (c) the
failure by any person to protect a child from physical harm or to report a case of
child abuse; (The Children Act 2022. Sec2)
6. Registratio
n
Every child has the right to be registered in the Register of Births immediately
after birth in accordance with the Births and Deaths Registration Act. The
Principal Registrar shall take measures to ensure correct documentation and
registration of intersex children at birth. ( A child found in Kenya who is or
appears to be less than eight years of age, and whose nationality and parents are
not known, shall be presumed to be a citizen by birth.(The Children Act 2022);
Births and Deaths Registration, The Cons titution of Kenya,2010)
7. Children on
the Street
A child living on or off the streets” means a child who— (a) because of abuse,
neglect, poverty, community upheaval or any other reason, has left his or her
8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. Child labor Child of
imprisoned
/ detained
parent(s)
Sexual
assault and
Abuse
Child
Trafficking
Parental
Child
Abduction
Child
infected
with HIV
Child in
conflict
with the
law.
Defilement home, family or community and lives, begs or works on the streets; (b) because of
inadequate care, begs or works on the streets but returns home at night. A child
found begging and receiving alms (The Children Act, 2022 Sec 142 (a,b))
Refers to work done by a child which is exploitative, hazardous or otherwise
inappropriate for a person of that age; and or places at risk the child's well-being,
education, physical or mental health, or spiritual, moral, emotional or social
development. (The Children Act 2022, (Preliminaries)).
Child whose parent or guardian has been detained, held in custody, or imprisoned
or is in remand, who is in the company of a parent or guardian who is detained,
held in custody, in prison or in remand; (Children Act 2022, 144(e) (f))
Refer Sexual offences Act, 2006 Sexual Exploitation and Abuse: Is actual or
attempted abuse of a position of vulnerability, power, or trust, for sexual purposes,
including, but not limited to, profiting monetarily, socially or politically from the
sexual exploitation of another. (World Health Organization (WHO))
Sexual abuse: is actual or threatened physical intrusion of a sexual nature, whether
by force or under unequal or coercive conditions
Child trafficking means the recruitment, transporting, transfer, harboring or
receipt of a child for the purpose of exploitation by means of (a) threat or use of
force or other forms of coercion; (b) abduction; (c) fraud; (d) deception; (e) abuse
of power or of position of vulnerability; (f) giving payment or benefit to achieve the
consent of the victim; or (g) giving or receiving payments or benefits to obtain the
consent of a person having control over the child: Provided that the recruitment,
transportation, transfer, harboring or receipt of a child for the purpose of
exploitation shall be considered as “child trafficking” even if it does not involve
any of the means set out in paragraphs (a) to (g) ( Children Act, 2022)
A parent abducts the child or otherwise prevents that other person from exercising
such access or responsibilities in respect of the child. (Children Act, 2022, Section
33 5(b))
Refers to a child whose HIV test indicates, directly or indirectly, that child is
infected with HIV and AIDS
(HIV and AIDS Prevention and Control Act, 2006)
Refers to a person who is above the age of twelve years, but below the age of
eighteen years, who has been dealt with or punished in accordance with Part XV
of this Act or any other written law for contravention of the law;
Or children accused of committing an offense (The Children Act, Sec 235)
Refers to a person who commits an act which causes penetration with a child
(boy/Girl)
(Sexual Offences Act 3 of 2006, Section 8 (1,2,3)
Refers to An Act which causes penetration with a child
"gang" means two or more persons;
"person with mental disabilities" means a person affected by any mental disability
irrespective of its cause, whether temporary or permanent and is:
a)unable to appreciate the nature and reasonably foreseeable consequences of any
act described under the sexual offences Act
b)able to appreciate the nature and reasonably foreseeable consequences of such
an act but unable to act in accordance with that appreciation.
c)unable to resist the commission of any such act; or
d)unable to communicate his or her unwillingness to participate in any such act;
Sodomy is part of defilement.
16. Child with
disability
17. Drug and
substance
abuse
18. Child
Pregnancy
19. Child
marriage
20. Emotional
abuse
21. Harmful
cultural
practices
22. Female
Genital
Mutilation
Disability includes any physical, sensory, mental, psychological, or other
impairment, condition or illness that has, or is perceived by significant sectors of
the community to have, a substantial or long-term effect on an individual’s ability
to carry out ordinary day-to-day activities; ( The Constitution of Kenya , 20 10
Article 260)
Refers to the use of hallucinogens, narcotics, alcohol, tobacco products, glue,
psychotropic drugs, or any other drugs that may be declared harmful by the
Cabinet Secretary responsible for matters relating to health; or Involvement in the
production, trafficking, sale, storage or distribution of the any of the drugs or
substances referred above. (The Ch ildren Act,2022 Sec 24(1))
Refers to a girl below the age of 18 conceiving and (having the embryo developing
in her womb) and carrying the pregnancy. (The Children Act, 2022, Sec)
Refers to marriage or cohabitation with a child or any arrangement made for such
marriage or cohabitation; (The Children Act, 2022, Sec 2)
Refers to act or omissions that affects a child’s healthy social and emotional
development and functioning including— (i) rejection; (ii) isolation, including
depriving the child of normal social interaction with others; (iii) deprivation of
affection or cognitive stimulation; or (iv) inappropriate criticism or comparison
with other children, discrimination, humiliation, threats, or malicious accusations,
directed at a child and the exposure of a child to emotionally, traumatic and age-
inappropriate content, information and photos of any kind; (The Children Act,
2022, Sec 2)
Refers to : (a) in the case of a male child, forced circumcision; (b) female genital
mutilation; (c) child marriage; (d) virginity testing; (e) girl child beading; (f)except
with the advice of a medical geneticist, organ change or removal in case of an
intersex child; or
(g) any other cultural or religious rite, custom or practice that is likely to
negatively affect the child's life, health, social wellbeing, dignity, physical,
emotional, or psychological development. (The Children Act, 2022, Sec 23)
Refers to procedures involving partial or total removal of the female genitalia or
other injury to the female genital organs, or any harmful procedure to the female
genitalia, for non-medical reasons, and includes; (a) clitoridectomy, which is the
partial or total removal of the clitoris or the prepuce; (b) excision, which is the
partial or total removal of the clitoris and the labia minora, with or without
excision of the labia majora; (c) infibulation, which is the narrowing of the vaginal
orifice with the creation of a covering seal by cutting and a positioning the labia
minora or the labia majora, with or without excision of the clitoris, but does not
include a sexual reassignment procedure or a medical procedure that has a
genuine therapeutic purpose;(Prohibition of Female Genital Mutilation Act, 2011)
23. Incest (1) Any male person who commits an indecent act or an act which causes
penetration with a female person who is to his knowledge his daughter,
granddaughter, sister, mother, niece, aunt, or grandmother is guilty of an
offence termed incest and is liable to imprisonment for a term of not less than
ten years
(2) Any female person who commits an indecent act or act which causes
penetration with a male person who is to her knowledge her son, father,
grandson, grandfather, brother, nephew, or uncle. In cases of the offence of
incest, brother and sister includes half-brother, half-sister and adoptive brother
and adoptive sister and a father includes a half father and an uncle of the first
degree and a mother includes a half mother and an aunt of the first degree
whether through lawful wedlock or not. (2) In this Act - (a) “uncle” means the
brother of a person’s parent and “aunt” has a corresponding meaning; (b)
“nephew” means the child of a person’ s brother or sister and “niece” has a
corresponding meaning; (c) “half-brother” means a brother who shares only
one parent with another; (d) “half-sister” means a sister who shares only one
parent with another; and (e) “adoptive brother” means a brother who is related
to another through adoption and “adoptive sister” has a corresponding
meaning. (Sexual Offences Act, 3 of 2006, Sec 20)
24. Disinherita
nce/
succession
Refers to cause a child to be disinherited on any grounds, including age, origin,
sex, religion, creed, custom, language, opinion, conscience, colour, birth, health
status, pregnancy, social, political, economic, or other status, race, disability, tribe,
residence or local connection (The Children Act 2022, Sec17. (2) (b))
25. Internally
Displaced
Child/(
CPIE)
A child who is displaced as a consequence of war, civil disturbances, or natural
disasters, or is otherwise a refugee.( Children Act 2022, Sec 144(X))
26. Missing
Child
/( Lost and
found )
Refers to a child who is lost and found and whose parent or guardian cannot be
found; (Children Act, 2022, Sec 144(d)) Refers to any person under the age of 18
whose whereabouts are unknown.(International Centre for Missing Children)
27. Neglect It refers to failure by any person who, having parental responsibility, custody,
charge or care of any child, and who by any act or omission, knowingly or willfully
causes that child to become, or contributes to his becoming, in need of care and
protection, where parent or guardian does not, or is unable or unfit to exercise
proper care and guardianship of the child; (The Children Act, 2022) Sec 152(1)b
and 144(g)
28. Online
Child
Abuse
Refers to crimes committed by offenders using Information Communication
Technology (ICT) and or the internet whether through social networks, playing
online games or by use of mobile phones or other electronic devices, to facilitate
the exploitation of children for sexual purposes.
Reference to Child online abuse include : (1) Child Pornography (2) live streaming
(3) Online grooming Sexting (4) Sextortion (5) cyber bullying (6) grooming and
solicitation (7) cyber enticement (8) cyber harassment (9) cyber stalking. (
Children Act, 2022, Sec 22(3C), 4) & NPA on OCSEA) .
29. Orphaned Orphan” means a child who has lost one or both of his or her parents in death;
(Children Acts, 2022, Sec 2 )
30. Refugee
child
A child who is displaced as a consequence of war, civil disturbances, or natural
disasters, or is otherwise a refugee.
(The Children Act, 2022, Sec( 144x))
31. Sexual
assault
Refers to Unlawful penetrating the genital organs of another person with any part
of the body of another or that person; or an object manipulated by another or that
person except where such penetration is carried out for proper and professional
hygienic or medical purposes.
Unlawful manipulation of any part of the body or the body of another person so as
to cause penetration of the genital organ into or by any part of the other person's
body. (Sexual Offences Act, 3 of 2006, Sec 5)
32. Child
Truancy
Refers to a child who is truant or is falling into bad associations; (Children Act
2022, Section 144(j))
33. Unlawful
confinemen
t
who has a disability or other special needs and is unlawfully confined, concealed,
or ill-treated; (Children Act 2022) 144(T)
34. Child offer Refers to children who are willingly offered for adoption by their biological parents
in accordance with the mandate under the children act 2022. (The Children Act
2022 section 185, 4c)
35. Child out of
school
Refers to a child of School going age who is not attending school due to various
reasons. (National Guideline for School Re-entry in Early Learning and Basic
Education 2020)
36. Sick child
(Chronic
Illness)
Refers to a child who is suffering from a terminal, debilitating or chronic illness
and whose parents are unable to exercise proper care of the child; or who needs
medical treatment but denied access thereto by the parents or guardians on
religious grounds. (The Children Act 2022, Sec 144 Z(ii) & (jj)).
37. Child
headed
household
A child who heads or lives in a child-headed household.Child-headed household:
A household in which a child or children (typically an older sibling) assumes the
primary responsibility for the day-to-day running of the household, providing and
caring for those within the household. The children in the household may or may
not be related. (The Children Act 2022) 144(dd)
38. Child
radicalizati
on
It means a process by which a person comes to adopt extreme political, social, or
religious ideals and aspirations that are aimed at inciting the person to violence or
into any behavior and belief that is harmful to the child. (The Children Act 2022,
Preliminaries).Sub Category . Violent extremism ii. Religious extremism
39. Forced
Male
Circumcisio
n
Comprises all procedures involving partial or total removal of the male genitalia or
other injury to the male genital organs, or any harmful procedure to the male
genitalia, for non-medical reasons, that is performed with or without any undue
influence, inducement, enticement, coercion, or intimidation on a male child —
(a) without consent of the child’s parents or guardian; (b) belonging to a
community that does not practice male circumcision and without the consent of
the child's parents or guardian; (c) with the intention to cause grievous harm or
injury to a child; (d) in a manner that infringes on a child’s right to privacy or
subjects a child to ridicule, embarrassment, humiliation or otherwise harms a
child; but does not include a sexual reassignment procedure or a medical
procedure that has a genuine therapeutic purpose; (Children Act, 2022, Sec 2 )
40. Destitute
child
The secretary shall assist children in hardship, including destitute
children(Children Act, 2022, Sec 38(f) )
41. Child
parent
B eing a child parent seeking either psychosocial or material support to cater for
their child, especially from the child father who could either be a child or an adult)
Table 2: Modes of Intervention, Definition, Source, and Indicators
No. Interventions 1.
Adoption
2.
Committed to
CCI’s
(Placement to
places of safety)
3.
Committed to
statutory.
Institution
4.
Professional
counseling
5.
Family support
6.
Foster care
7.
Guardianship
8. Joint parental
agreement
(Parental
responsibility
Agreement)
(PRA)
9.
Application for
Judicial orders
10.
Legal aid
11.
Child
maintenance
12. Placement in
school
/(Enrolment)
Definitions
The process through which a child is permanently placed with a legal parent
or parents in accordance with Part XIV of Children Act 2022
Place of safety includes any institution, school, feeding Centre, hospital or
other place that is suitable for temporary care of children, but does not include
a children’s remand home, rehabilitation school, police station or child
protection unit;
An authorized officer or any other person who has reasonable cause to believe
that a child is in need of care and protection shall take the child into safe
custody and, at the earliest opportunity, place the child in a place of safety in
facilities other than those in which children in conflict with the law are held,
pending presentation to the Court for appropriate orders. (Children Act 2022
145(2))
If the Court is satisfied that it is in the best interests of the child, commit such
child to a rehabilitation school suitable to the needs and interests of the child;
(Children Act 2022. Sec 150(2c)
A person appointed to provide such advice, counseling and guidance to a
child, his parents or custodian or guardians, the child’s relatives, or any
person who has care and control of the child or with whom the child is
residing, as the Court may specify;(The Children Act, 2022, 135 (e))
The State shall provide appropriate social security to persons who are unable
to support themselves and their dependent’s. (Constitution of Kenya 2010,
Article 43(3))
Refers to temporary placement of a child or children in the care of a person
who is not the parent, relative or guardian of the child; (The Children Act,
2022, Sec2)
Refers to appointment by will or deed by a parent of a child or by an order of
Court to assume parental responsibility over a child on the death of the parent
of the child either alone or jointly with the surviving parent of the child in
accordance with the provisions of this Act.(The Children Act, 2022, Sec122(1))
Parents of a child and who are not married to each other may enter into a
parental responsibility agreement, in the prescribed form, whereby both, in
the best interests of the child, designate and agree on clear individual
responsibilities towards the child. (The Children Act, 2022, Sec 33(1))
the Secretary shall have the power to institute proceeding in respect of any
contravention relating to child maintenance, child neglect and abuseThe
orders that are issued by the court in any proceedings concerning the well-
being and protection of a child (The Children Act, 2022, Sec 39 (2))
"legal aid" includes- reaching or giving effect to any out-of-court settlement;
(Legal Aid Act 2016)
“maintenance order” means an order issued by a court directing a specified
person to make such periodic or lump sum payment for the maintenance of the
child on such terms as the Court may consider appropriate;(Children Act 2022,
Sec2)
Enrolment of children in appropriate educational facilities (Operational) Re-
entry/Enrolment
13.
Reunification
14.
Reconciliation
15.
Referred to
Court/Khadhi
16. Referred to
other
Government
agencies
17.
Referred to
other non- state
agencies
18.
Reintegration
19.
Repatriation
20.
Release to
parent(s)/Careg
iver(s)
21.
Rescue and
placement
22.
Supervision and
guidance order
23.
Supervision
without court
order
(Diversion)
The decision to reunite a child with his or her biological parents on
termination of foster care placement shall be based on the principle of the best
interest of the child. (The Children Act 2022, Sec 2)
promote family reconciliation and mediate in disputes involving children,
parents, guardians or persons who have parental responsibility in the manner
provided under this Act; (The Children Act 2022, Sec 38(m))
The process of formally requesting services for a child or their family from
another agency (e.g. cash assistance, health care, etc.) through an established
procedure and/or form. (Guidelines for child protection case management and
referral 2019)
The process of formally requesting services for a child or their family from
another agency (e.g. cash assistance, health care, etc.) through an established
procedure and/or form. (Guidelines for child protection case management and
referral 2019)
The process of formally requesting services for a child or their family from
another agency (e.g. cash assistance, health care, etc.) through an established
procedure and/or form. (Guidelines for child protection case management and
referral 2019)
Is the process of a separated child making what is anticipated to be a
permanent transition back to his or her immediate or extended family and the
community (usually of origin), in order to receive protection and care and to
find a sense of belonging and purpose in all spheres of life (The National Care
Reform Strategy for Children in Kenya 2022-2032)
The process of returning a person to their place/country of origin or
citizenship (National Referral Mechanism for Assisting Victims of Human
Trafficking in Kenya)
Refers to where a child is taken to a place of safety by an authorized officer or
other person without reference to the Court, the parent or guardian or any
person who has parental responsibility in respect of the child may apply to the
Secretary for the release of the child from the place of safety into his or her
care (The children Act 2022, Sec 145-7)
Refers to removal of a child from an abusive environment (place/family) and
placing the child in a place of safety awaiting further assistance in the best
interest of the child.
The Secretary Children Services shall intervene and secure the removal of a
child in need of care and protection to a place of safety;(The Children Act,
2022, Sec 38 L)
It means an order placing a child under the supervision and guidance of a
mentor or peer in order to monitor and guide the child's behavior. (The
Children Act 2022).
It means the intervention and programme designed to divert children from
Criminal Justice System with the aim of— (a) reducing stigmatization of
children in conflict with the law; (b) identifying children at risk and
connecting them with appropriate support services in an attempt to reduce the
likelihood of the children engaging in antisocial behaviour; and (c) providing
programmes and support to children who have engaged in offending conduct,
prevent them progressing further into the system; and (d) reducing recidivism
by children in conflict with the law;(The Children Act 2022, Sec 2)
24.
Written
promise
25. Revocation of
children’s
committal order
26. Release on
expiry of an
order
27. Release on
license
28.
Committed to a
fit person
29.
Kinship Care
30.
Supported child
headed
Household
31.
Supported
independent
living
32.
Kafaalah
Refers to a commitment by a child to adhere to good morals/behavior and is
supervised by the Children Officer or any authorized officer in the best
interest of the child (Operational)
A child released from a holding center before the expiry of an earlier set
period, triggered by another order revoking the earlier order (The Children
Act, 2022, Sec 82)
It refers to a child committed to a rehabilitation school released after the
expiration of the prescribed period of his or her stay. (The Children Act 2022,
Sec83).
A child released temporarily from an institution (Operational)
Fit person means a person in respect of whom it is shown to the satisfaction of
the Court to be of high moral character and integrity, and who is capable of
exercising proper care and guardianship of a child; Where an application is
made to a children’s Court for an order under section150, and the child is not
in a place of safety, the Court may direct the applicant to bring the child
before the Court, whereupon the provisions of subsection (3) of that section
shall apply so as to enable the Court to make an interim order for the
temporary accommodation of the child in a place of safety or for his or her
temporary committal to the care of a fit person. (The Children Act, Sec 150)
Kinship care (informal) is a private arrangement within an extended family
whereby a child is looked after on a temporary or long-term basis by his/her
maternal or paternal extended family, without it being ordered by an
administrative or judicial authority. Family members include grandparents,
aunts, uncles, and older siblings.
Kinship care (formal) is an arrangement ordered by an external
administrative or judicial authority, whereby a child is looked after on a
temporary or long-term basis by his/her maternal or paternal extended family.
Family members include grandparents, aunts, uncles, and older siblings. (Case
Management for Reintegration of Children into Family or Community Based
Care 2019)
Refers to a situation where a child or children (typically an older sibling)
assumes the primary responsibility for the day-to-day running of the
household, providing and caring for those within the household. The children
in the household may or may not be related. (Case Management for
Reintegration of Children into Family or Community Based Care 2019)
Refers to where a young person is supported in her/his own home, group
home, hostel, or other form of accommodation to become independent.
Support/social workers are available as needed and at planned intervals to
offer assistance and support but not to provide supervision(Case Management
for Reintegration of Children into Family or Community Based Care 2019)
Refer the taking in of a child who is deprived of parental and family care and
protection by a person professing the Islamic faith who is capable of looking
after a child in accordance with the Children Act; (The Children Act 2022, Sec
2)